Closes #252 autoslider.core post (#279)
pharmaverse/blog: posts/zzz_DO_NOT_EDIT_automatic_s.../automatic_slide_generation_with_{autoslide_r}.qmd

---
title: "Automatic slide generation with {autoslideR}"
author:
  - name: Stefan P. Thoma

> description: ""

Reviewer: Please add a description

# Note that the date below will be auto-updated when the post is merged.
date: "2025-03-01"
# Please do not use any non-default categories.
# You can find the default categories in the repository README.md

> categories: [TLG]

Reviewer 2: feels like we need a new category??? @manciniedoardo just can quite identify what it shoudl be

Reviewer: hmm, what's wrong with TLG?

Reviewer 2: the package makes slides ( I get it is TLF source!) for I assuming some type of Headline Results meetings, CSR, internal review, etc.   Was just thinking if we want to be more nuanced in our categories?

TLGs should be included.  Maybe just Slides?

Author: I think I would leave it for now, and if there are additional related posts we can retroactively add the tag. wdyt, @bms63 ?

Reviewer 3: TLG is the right category.

# Feel free to change the image
image: "pharmaverse.png"

---

<!--------------- typical setup ----------------->

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
long_slug <- "zzz_DO_NOT_EDIT_automatic_s..."
library(link)
link::auto()
```

<!--------------- post begins here ----------------->

> We are excited to announce that the {autoslider.core} package is now a part of Pharmaverse! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are excited to announce that the {autoslider.core} package is now a part of pharmaverse! 
```
we don't capitalise pharmaverse if in a sentence

> This package let's users create slides with study-specific outputs in an automated and reproducible way -- without the need to copy-paste.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This package lets users create slides with study-specific outputs in an automated and reproducible way -- without the need to copy-paste.
```

> It is particularly helpful for slides that need to be continuously created  with updated data, such as slides needed for dose-escalation meetings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is particularly helpful for slides that need to be continuously created with updated data, such as slides needed for dose-escalation meetings.
```

> We are excited to announce that the {autoslider.core} package is now a part of pharmaverse! 
> This package lets users create slides with study-specific outputs in an automated and reproducible way -- without the need to copy-paste.
> It is particularly helpful for slides that need to be continuously created with updated data, such as slides needed for dose-escalation meetings.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We are excited to announce that the {autoslider.core} package is now a part of pharmaverse! 

The normal process of creating clinical study slides is that a statistician manually type in the numbers from outputs and a separate statistician to double check the typed in numbers. This process is time consuming, resource intensive, and error prone. 
This package lets users create slides with study-specific outputs in an automated and reproducible way -- without the need to copy-paste.
It reduces the amount of work and the required time when creating slides, and reduces the risk of errors from manually typing or copying numbers from the output to slides. It also helps users to avoid unnecessary stress when creating large amounts of slide decks in a short time window.
It is particularly helpful for slides that need to be continuously created with updated data, such as slides needed for dose-escalation meetings.
```

> The value proposition of the {autoslider.core} package is two-fold: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The autoslider development work started as an internal initiative, and as it grew over the years, it was well received, we decided to open-source this package, at the same time not causing any downstream breaking changes to our users. therefore, the autoslider package became two layers, the outer layer exposed to internal use remains as autoslider, which now mostly contains Roche-specific formats, layouts and designs, and the inner layer, aka {autoslider.core}, which controls the rendering and workflow, are open source, it is fully functional and user-facing on its own as well. We consider {autoslider} as a framework, and would like to invite users to build your own {autoslider.*} packages as well. For more developer guidelines, you can find them at the [package homepage](https://insightsengineering.github.io/autoslider.core/latest-tag/articles/opensource.html)

The value proposition of the {autoslider.core} package is two-fold: 
```

This script guides through the workflow without needing the files in `R/`. 
However, custom output-creating functions can be stored in the `R/` folder.

## Specifications (`specs.yml`)
This file contains the specifications of all outputs you want to create. 
Each output includes details such as the program name, footnotes & titles, paper orientation and font size, suffix, and additional arguments.

The following example `specs.yml` content would create two outputs based off of two template functions, autoslider.core::t_ds_slide and autoslider.core::t_dm_slide:

```
- program: t_ds_slide
  titles: Patient Disposition ({filter_titles("adsl")})
  footnotes: 't_ds footnotes'
  paper: L6
  suffix: ITT
- program: t_dm_slide
  titles: Patient Demographics and Baseline Characteristics
  footnotes: 't_dm_slide footnote'
  paper: L6
  suffix: ITT
  args:
    arm: "TRT01A"
    vars: ["SEX", "AGE", "RACE", "ETHNIC", "COUNTRY"]
```

## Filters (filters.yml)

In the filters.yml file, the names of the filters used across outputs are specified. 
Each filter includes a name, title, filtering condition, target dataset, and type.

> The following example `filters.yml` file specifies 4 commonly used filters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example `filters.yml` file specifies four commonly used filters:
```

```

```{r}
library("dplyr")
# load all filters
filters::load_filters(filters, overwrite = TRUE)
# read data
data <- list(
  "adsl" = eg_adsl %>%
    mutate(
      FASFL = SAFFL, # add FASFL for illustrative purpose for t_pop_slide
      # DISTRTFL is needed for t_ds_slide but is missing in example data
      DISTRTFL = sample(c("Y", "N"), size = length(TRT01A), replace = TRUE, prob = c(.1, .9))
    ) %>%
    preprocess_t_ds(), # this preproccessing is required by one of the autoslider.core functions
  "adae" = eg_adae,
  "adtte" = eg_adtte,
  "adrs" = eg_adrs,
  "adlb" = eg_adlb
)

# create outputs based on the specs and the functions
outputs <- spec_file %>%
  read_spec() %>%
  filter_spec(., program %in% c("t_ds_slide", "t_dm_slide")) %>%
  generate_outputs(datasets = data) %>%
  decorate_outputs(version_label = NULL)
```
  
## Example of saving outputs to a slide:

```{r}
# Output to slides with template and color theme
outputs %>%
  generate_slides(
    outfile = tempfile(fileext = ".pptx"),
    template = file.path(system.file(package = "autoslider.core"), "/theme/basic.pptx"),
    table_format = autoslider_format
  )
```
  
  
  
## Writing Custom Functions

> For study-specific outputs not covered by `autoslider.core` functions, you can create custom functions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For study-specific outputs not covered by {autoslider.core} functions, you can create custom functions. 
```

> Custom functions need to return either a ggplot2 (for plots), {rtables} (for tables), or {rlistings} or `data.frame` objects (for listings).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom functions need to return either a {ggplot2} (for plots), {rtables} (for tables), or {rlistings} or `data.frame` objects (for listings).
```

    tern::append_varlabels(adlb_f_crp, "ANRIND", indent = 1L) %>%
    rtables::append_topleft("    Baseline Status")

  result <- rtables::build_table(lyt = lyt, df = adlb_f_crp, alt_counts_df = adsl) %>%
    rtables::trim_rows()

  result
}
```

Testing the custom function:

```{r}
lbt06(data)
```

To use the custom function within the {autoslider.core} workflow, ensure it is available in the global environment:

```{r, eval = FALSE}
source("programs/output_functions.R")
```
With the correct `specs.yml` and `filters.yml`, integrate the custom function into the general workflow:

```{r, eval = FALSE}
filters <- "filters.yml"
spec_file <- "specs.yml"
filters::load_filters(filters, overwrite = TRUE)
outputs <- spec_file %>%
  read_spec() %>%
  generate_outputs(data) %>%
  decorate_outputs()

outputs$lbt06_ITT_LBCRP_LBNOBAS
```

```{r, hide = TRUE}
outputs <- spec_file %>%
  read_spec() %>%
  generate_outputs(data) %>%
  decorate_outputs()
outputs$lbt06_ITT_LBCRP_LBNOBAS
```

Generate the slides:
```{r}
filepath <- tempfile(fileext = ".pptx")
generate_slides(outputs, outfile = filepath)
```

> We hope this guide helps you get started with {autoslider.core} in Pharmaverse. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope this guide helps you get started with {autoslider.core} in pharmaverse. 
```

---
title: "Automatic slide generation with {autoslider.core}"
author:
  - name: Stefan P. Thoma, Joe Zhu
description: "{autoslider.core} is a newly open-sourced package for automatically creating standard study outputs and adding them to PowerPoint slides."
# Note that the date below will be auto-updated when the post is merged.
date: "2025-03-01"
# Please do not use any non-default categories.
# You can find the default categories in the repository README.md
categories: [TLG]
# Feel free to change the image
image: "pharmaverse.png"

---

<!--------------- typical setup ----------------->

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
long_slug <- "zzz_DO_NOT_EDIT_automatic_s..."
library(link)
link::auto()
```

<!--------------- post begins here ----------------->

We are excited to announce that the {autoslider.core} package is now a part of pharmaverse! 

> The normal process of creating clinical study slides is that a statistician manually type in the numbers from outputs and a separate statistician to double check the typed in numbers. This process is time consuming, resource intensive, and error prone. 

Author: ```suggestion
The normal process of creating clinical study slides is that a statistician manually types in numbers from outputs and a separate statistician then double checks the typed-in numbers. This process is time consuming, resource intensive, and error prone. 
```

This package lets users create slides with study-specific outputs in an automated and reproducible way -- without the need to copy-paste.
It reduces the amount of work and the required time when creating slides, and reduces the risk of errors from manually typing or copying numbers from the output to slides. It also helps users to avoid unnecessary stress when creating large amounts of slide decks in a short time window.
It is particularly helpful for slides that need to be continuously created with updated data, such as slides needed for dose-escalation meetings.

> The autoslider development work started as an internal initiative, and as it grew over the years, it was well received, we decided to open-source this package, at the same time not causing any downstream breaking changes to our users. therefore, the autoslider package became two layers, the outer layer exposed to internal use remains as autoslider, which now mostly contains Roche-specific formats, layouts and designs, and the inner layer, aka {autoslider.core}, which controls the rendering and workflow, are open source, it is fully functional and user-facing on its own as well. We consider {autoslider} as a framework, and would like to invite users to build your own {autoslider.*} packages as well. For more developer guidelines, you can find them at the [package homepage](https://insightsengineering.github.io/autoslider.core/latest-tag/articles/opensource.html)

Author: ```suggestion
The autoslider development work started as a Roche internal initiative, and as it grew over the years, it was well received, we decided to open-source this package, at the same time not causing any downstream breaking changes to our users. therefore, the autoslider package became two layers, the outer layer exposed to internal use remains as autoslider, which now mostly contains Roche-specific formats, layouts and designs, and the inner layer, aka {autoslider.core}, which controls the rendering and workflow, are open source, it is fully functional and user-facing on its own as well. We consider {autoslider} as a framework, and would like to invite users to build your own {autoslider.*} packages as well. For more developer guidelines, you can find them at the [package homepage](https://insightsengineering.github.io/autoslider.core/latest-tag/articles/opensource.html)
```

> The autoslider development work started as an internal initiative, and as it grew over the years, it was well received, we decided to open-source this package, at the same time not causing any downstream breaking changes to our users. therefore, the autoslider package became two layers, the outer layer exposed to internal use remains as autoslider, which now mostly contains Roche-specific formats, layouts and designs, and the inner layer, aka {autoslider.core}, which controls the rendering and workflow, are open source, it is fully functional and user-facing on its own as well. We consider {autoslider} as a framework, and would like to invite users to build your own {autoslider.*} packages as well. For more developer guidelines, you can find them at the [package homepage](https://insightsengineering.github.io/autoslider.core/latest-tag/articles/opensource.html)

Author: Ah the open source package is called {autoslider.core}, so link will not work if you write {autoslider}

> The autoslider development work started as an internal initiative, and as it grew over the years, it was well received, we decided to open-source this package, at the same time not causing any downstream breaking changes to our users. therefore, the autoslider package became two layers, the outer layer exposed to internal use remains as autoslider, which now mostly contains Roche-specific formats, layouts and designs, and the inner layer, aka {autoslider.core}, which controls the rendering and workflow, are open source, it is fully functional and user-facing on its own as well. We consider {autoslider} as a framework, and would like to invite users to build your own {autoslider.*} packages as well. For more developer guidelines, you can find them at the [package homepage](https://insightsengineering.github.io/autoslider.core/latest-tag/articles/opensource.html)

Reviewer: you're right - please ignore that part of the suggestion

> The autoslider development work started as an internal initiative, and as it grew over the years, it was well received, we decided to open-source this package, at the same time not causing any downstream breaking changes to our users. therefore, the autoslider package became two layers, the outer layer exposed to internal use remains as autoslider, which now mostly contains Roche-specific formats, layouts and designs, and the inner layer, aka {autoslider.core}, which controls the rendering and workflow, are open source, it is fully functional and user-facing on its own as well. We consider {autoslider} as a framework, and would like to invite users to build your own {autoslider.*} packages as well. For more developer guidelines, you can find them at the [package homepage](https://insightsengineering.github.io/autoslider.core/latest-tag/articles/opensource.html)

Reviewer: maybe `{autoslider}` like this?

> The autoslider development work started as an internal initiative, and as it grew over the years, it was well received, we decided to open-source this package, at the same time not causing any downstream breaking changes to our users. therefore, the autoslider package became two layers, the outer layer exposed to internal use remains as autoslider, which now mostly contains Roche-specific formats, layouts and designs, and the inner layer, aka {autoslider.core}, which controls the rendering and workflow, are open source, it is fully functional and user-facing on its own as well. We consider {autoslider} as a framework, and would like to invite users to build your own {autoslider.*} packages as well. For more developer guidelines, you can find them at the [package homepage](https://insightsengineering.github.io/autoslider.core/latest-tag/articles/opensource.html)

Author: ```suggestion
The `autoslider` development work started as a Roche internal initiative. As it grew over the years it and was well received, we decided to open-source this package while at the same time not causing any downstream breaking changes to our internal users.
Therefore, the `autoslider` package became two layers; the outer layer exposed to internal use remains as autoslider, which now mostly contains Roche-specific formats, layouts and designs, and the inner layer, aka {autoslider.core}, which controls the rendering and workflow and is open source.
It is fully functional and user-facing on its own. 
We consider `autoslider` as a framework, and would like to invite users to build your own `autoslider.*` packages as well. 
You can find developer guidelines at the [package homepage](https://insightsengineering.github.io/autoslider.core/latest-tag/articles/opensource.html).
```

> The autoslider development work started as a Roche internal initiative, and as it grew over the years, it was well received, we decided to open-source this package, at the same time not causing any downstream breaking changes to our users. therefore, the autoslider package became two layers, the outer layer exposed to internal use remains as autoslider, which now mostly contains Roche-specific formats, layouts and designs, and the inner layer, aka {autoslider.core}, which controls the rendering and workflow, are open source, it is fully functional and user-facing on its own as well. We consider {autoslider} as a framework, and would like to invite users to build your own {autoslider.*} packages as well. For more developer guidelines, you can find them at the [package homepage](https://insightsengineering.github.io/autoslider.core/latest-tag/articles/opensource.html)

Author: ```suggestion
The `autoslider` development work started as a Roche internal initiative.
As it grew over the years, it was well received and we decided to open-source this package while at the same time not causing any downstream breaking changes to our internal users.
Therefore, the `autoslider` package became two layers, the outer layer exposed to internal users remains as `autoslider`.
It now mostly contains Roche-specific formats, layouts and designs.
The inner layer, aka {autoslider.core}, which controls the rendering and workflow, is open source and fully functional and user-facing on its own.
We consider `autoslider` as a framework, and would like to invite users to build their own `autoslider.*` packages. 
You can find t0he developer guidelines at the [package homepage](https://insightsengineering.github.io/autoslider.core/latest-tag/articles/opensource.html).
```
